There it goes.
We're testing, testing.
One, two, three, four.
I guess we're all in line then.
This is March the 6th, I believe.
And we're March 5th over on Berkeley Street in the study of Dr. Alva Niles to try to record some of his memories of his years of service here at Texas A&M.
Alva, would you describe growing up, background, family, where'd you go to college?
Tell your story before you got to College Station.
Introduce yourself to anyone that might listen to this tape or read it.
Oh, okay.
I was born in Arizona in Flagstaff.
My dad was a park ranger at Grand Canyon.
But he was a native New Mexican, and we went back to Taos, and that's where I grew up as a boy through high school or at least through the 11th grade.
Dad was a, had been a cowboy, a truck driver, a store, operated a grocery store.
In later years of his life, he was a warehouseman for the U.S.
Forest Service.
Then he spent the last 20 years, I suppose, roughly, as a manager of a building products company in Taos.
I graduated from high school in Santa Fe, actually, because Dad had gone to work with the engineers when they were building Los Alamos in 1942, I suppose, somewhere along in there.
And that really was the last time I lived with my family.
I spent a couple of summers working with the Forest Service on forest road projects.
Enrolled in New Mexico State at that time.
Finished one semester and volunteered and went to the service with the Navy.
That would have been in 1943.
And I was discharged from there in
2006, resumed my education at New Mexico State.
Graduated there in 49.
Went on to Oklahoma A&M to work on an MS degree.
Majoring in?
Majoring in agronomy in both cases.
Finished up there in 1950.
Went back to New Mexico State as an instructor in agronomy.
barely became acquainted with my class, and the Navy came and got me for recall during the Korean conflict.
After that, then, discharged from there, went back to Oklahoma, working at the Oklahoma Cotton Research Station in Chickasha.
Spent two years, then came to College Station,
to work in cotton breeding and to do academic work toward a PhD.
How did you and A&M know about each other?
Primarily through people I had met professionally in the cotton industry, primarily.
Such as?
Dr. Tom Richmond would be the main one, Dr. Charlie Lewis,
LEWIS?
LEWIS, who lives in Bryan.
Those are the main ones, I guess.
And I came here primarily to work with Richmond.
He was the professor and officer in charge of the Cotton Research Program.
Did you, did they find you or did you find them?
I found them.
Did you write to them or talk to them or both?
I wrote to them.
And I had become acquainted with him at a meeting in Biloxi, first professional meeting I ever went to.
And it worked out that they were in the market for someone in their program.
So we moved down here in the summer of 1953.
Not going to ask you money many times.
What was that first compensation?
When you first came?
Thirty, I can dig that out.
I think it was about $3,600.
For 12 months.
And as far as you knew, what were your responsibilities, your duties?
I was an assistant, I titled as an assistant agronomist.
I'm sorry, an assistant professor.
Working solely in research in the cotton program.
under the tutelage of Dr. T.R.
Richmond.
He was my mentor primarily.
People like Richmond and Lewis, Maida Brown, those are the ones that I knew initially the best.
So I grew up professionally.
I grew up here at Texas A&M.
As far as you knew at that point, what kind of status did A&M's research program have in cotton?
It was one of the major players internationally in Cotton.
Who else was competitive with them?
Mississippi State in a certain way, Arkansas to a limited extent, California, University of California, University of Arizona, North Carolina State was a major player.
The cotton program here at that time probably had the broadest range of disciplinarians, all the way from very basic research with Maida Brown and Margaret Menzel on up through people like Richmond, Fred Elliott, who was an extension.
So it ran the gamut from very, very basic to applied.
And I was in an applied
cotton breeding program.
Those were my responsibilities.
All right.
And so you and your wife moved down here from?
From Chickasha.
Chickasha.
What did you bring?
Describe the move.
What did you bring with you?
We didn't have much to bring with us.
We didn't even own an automobile.
We came down here on a bus.
Really?
So you brought things in suitcases?
Mainly.
You know, we had a few things, but not a great deal.
Did you have some furniture shipped?
Not much.
We had been very transient.
Where did you end up living when you first got here?
When we first lived here, moved here, we lived on Edgemore in Bryan in a house that belonged to a veterinarian.
We lived there two years and then built the house on Bolton.
What did the Edgemere, what was the rent, do you remember?
Oh, no, I can't remember that far back.
All right, you built the house on Bolton.
Do you remember the cost of the lot and or the house?
The lot and the house were somewhere on the order of 13,000 as nearly as I can remember.
And what else was there in that neighborhood in Eastgate then?
Was that the only house on the street, just about?
Ours was probably the third or fourth house on that street.
Most of the Eastgate populace were down on Milner.
What's that next street?
There were two of them there primarily.
Those were older homes.
That's where many of the teaching staff, A&M staff, lived there then.
So, and then some up along Walton Drive.
So, Bolton was an offshoot of that and those were all new homes in there at that time.
Describe the agronomy department when you arrived.
Who was it and where was it?
What facilities did it have?
At that time, Jim Adams was the head of the department.
The department was housed
mostly in what was known as the old Experiment Station building.
And the building next to it, and I don't remember the name of that, the old red brick building, that's where the soil labs, the chemistry labs were located.
The other building that I was in
housed all of the crops people, as I recall, and most of the extension staff.
It was a very handy thing because ours was a half-basement office.
I could park right outside my window.
Now, you said you all didn't bring a car, though.
How soon before you bought a car?
Our first car, gosh, I don't remember.
I would guess somewhere around 1953 or 54, let's see.
We came in 53, we were without an automobile for at least a couple of years.
How did you get around?
Well, there was a little bus service at that time, and we were living there just off of
Texas Avenue, and we could use that.
So you, you, you caught a, you rode a bus?
Yeah, I rode a bus, yeah.
Do you remember what the fare, what it cost?
See, I didn't, I didn't know about this.
No, gosh, no.
I can remember the bus driver.
I can see his face still.
It was an old school bus type vehicle.
It ran to town and ran to A&M, and I could catch it.
What was it like to be a newcomer in those days?
How were newcomers treated?
Well, as I recall, there was a newcomer's club which catered mainly to the females, to the wives.
They sort of took care of those.
I didn't get involved in much of that because I was just busy, you know, trying to learn my trade.
But the fact that you were not a native Texan and had not gone to A&M, did that ever?
No.
Oh, I used to get joshed about it a little bit.
But no, that was never any hindrance in any way.
And in the department, who were the major leaders?
Dr. John Rogers, who still lives here in Bryan.
George Kunze.
What was George, what was Dean Kunze, wasn't Dean at then, what was his specialty?
George was over in soil physics or
either soil physics or soil chemistry.
I think soil physics.
Then he moved on and Morris Bloodworth moved up here from Westlaco.
So Morris Bloodworth was the department head I knew best during the years I was here.
When did he take over?
I can't answer that.
It would be a wild guess.
I'd say it's probably early 60s, somewhere along there.
Because Rogers succeeded Adams as department head.
Then Rogers went off with ASGRO, seed company.
Oh, A-S.
A-S-G-R-O-W.
And that is when...
No, Bloodworth was over in soils, and then Bloodworth moved into the department.
Did the department have sections, like soil?
Yes, yes.
There was cotton investigations, corn investigations, miscellaneous crops, small grains.
Those are the ones I recall right off the top of my head.
When you first arrived, did anybody, either in a comparatively formal way or even very informally, did they give you any advice as a newcomer?
Here's what we are doing, here's what you ought to do, here's... Yeah, I was...
What was that advice?
I was indoctrinated in what the program was, and through my contacts, nothing programmed.
Okay.
But Richmond was a good teacher.
He believed very strongly in giving a fellow the outline of his responsibilities, what they were, his job, his obligations, and turn them loose.
You proved yourself.
That was his basic philosophy.
Were there some other young, new members like you at that time?
Uh-huh.
In our group, no.
I was the youngster.
And it was clear, correct me if I'm wrong, it was clear
to you and everyone else that you were a member of the professional group, but you were also going to be working on your doctoral degree?
Yeah.
Okay.
We, at that time, we were allowed to take one course a semester.
And I think maybe a course during the summer.
So it took me, see, I had to wait a year to establish residency before I could enroll.
So that took five years.
And I finished up my degree then in 1959.
And what was your, describe your specific research?
My specific research was initially to handle the applied cotton breeding program.
I did that for about three or four years.
That's when I really learned my,
my job and my science.
Mr. D.T.
Killow at that time was elderly, and he retired and had been running the cotton variety evaluation program in the state of Texas.
And I was asked to take that on, which I did.
That broadened my contacts considerably because I worked all the way from Wesley Co to El Paso to Lubbock and Plainview, wherever cotton was growing.
So I stayed pretty much in that for several years.
constantly growing a little bit more all the time.
Then ultimately, in 1974, Richmond retired.
Both Richmond and Maida Brown and Fred Elliott, who was my extension counterpart.
We did a lot of work together.
And I sort of moved into the in charge of the cotton breeding program.
Cotton Investigations was the way it was titled.
And that's what I did for the rest of my career here.
And the title of your dissertation?
The title of my dissertation had to do with the
and I can't give you a title, it's just too long ago, had to do with the use of imported African cotton stocks as sources of useful breeding traits in the development of cotton varieties.
And summarize what you found in that research.
Not a great deal.
That was very useful.
But it was exotic germplasm that needed to be screened and evaluated.
And that's what I did through a series of controlled hybridizations and then testing out the progeny from those.
And where did you do that research?
I did it here.
All here?
All of that was here.
And is, is, how much of that was laboratory and how much of it was field?
It was basically all field.
The only laboratory part of that would have been in the assessment of fiber properties.
And that was done, actually, at Texas Tech, because that's where the lab was that we used.
Now, in effect, did you attempt to cross some of those varieties with some of our... We used some of our local material as test varieties.
and then combined those with series, as I recall, eight different African germplasm stocks.
Where in Africa geographically did it come from?
Most of those came out of Uganda from a man named Hutchison, who was a very well-respected and renowned cotton botanist, an Englishman.
Was cotton grown in large quantities in Africa then?
Yes.
Really?
And Uganda was a major player in that.
They had a huge research program in the Uganda at that time, up until, I mean, Idi Amin, isn't that the one that came in?
Yeah, and he destroyed everything, of course.
And I had an opportunity to visit that station in later years and see what little was left of it.
Now, my wife is from a little town in North Carolina called Mebin.
And one of the young men that came up, grew up there,
from the family for which it's named.
He came to Lockhart, Texas, and his name was pronounced Mebane.
Yep.
And was Mebane cotton still?
Mebane cotton was an old, one of the older varieties in Texas that had really played a very prominent part in the development of the Texas cotton industry.
It had been used a great deal as parental material
in the development of later improved varieties.
Yes, I became acquainted with the Meebane varieties right away.
But was there, and when you got here, was there still a... Oh, yeah.
Oh, it was still identified as... In your doctoral research, that was, though part of the research you were assigned to do,
Describe during those years, those first three, four, five years here, describe your typical routine.
A week, you began a day at what time and stayed until what time, and about how much of the week were you here and how much were you on the road and so forth?
Initially, I was here almost exclusively, very little travel.
Normally, work day nominally was from 8 to 5, but depending on time of the year,
During planting season, during harvest season, when irrigation came along, I can remember working 18, 20 hours a day simply to get things done, particularly when we were really developing irrigation in the Brazos bottom at that time.
And it wasn't very refined.
So normally I went to work somewhere around 7, 7, 15.
And I probably stayed until 5.30 or so.
With a young family, I didn't spend too much time away.
Now, the acreage down in the bottom on which y'all were planting these experimental crops was located where?
On the A&M plantation, which still exists.
South of Highway 60?
Yes, across the bridge on the left.
There is a little A&M land on the right side.
And that basically is where much of my research was done in those fields.
Which?
On the right side of the highway.
On the north side of the highway.
Yeah, on the north side of the highway.
But we also had lands assigned to us back in the larger part of the plantation.
About how many acres did you use?
At that time, I probably altogether had a total of maybe 35 or 40 acres under my immediate supervision.
All right, now, if I'm not mistaken, the 50s, we had some drought conditions in Texas.
How did that affect your work?
Here, not too much.
At that time, I was beginning to travel out in the states, particularly into southern Texas.
I can remember the drought in the...
Nueces County area, Kingsville in there.
I had never seen anything like that.
Describe as much as you can that you remember.
I can remember what we call bumblebee cotton.
It barely got out of the ground and would be 8 to 10 inches tall and maybe it would have one bowl on it.
But I had seen cotton like that in Oklahoma, which was sort of not unusual up there.
What did the farmers and the hired hands do?
Of course, there was less demand for labor.
People associated with the harvesting industry and with the ginning industry suffered a great deal.
There just wasn't any crop to process.
And that extended on through not only the gins but into the compresses and the warehouses all through the marketing system.
And did some of them go broke and close up?
I can't recall any specifically, no.
As far as you're aware, did the acreage, the total Texas acreage in cotton go
down and stay down, or did it come back up?
It came back up.
Did it shift geographically after that?
Well, yeah.
At the time I came here, cotton was really almost out of East Texas, say east of Highway 45, I-45.
There wasn't any.
It was in bad shape in the Texas Blacklands.
It was being replaced with pastures, permanent pastures, grain sorden.
So cotton was moving into the High Plains heavily, into the Lower Rio Grande Valley, into the Pecos area at that time.
Didn't last very long there.
And out in the El Paso area in the High Plains.
Yeah, I saw, I was a witness to those
acreage shifts during the 50s and early 60s.
See, I lived in Garland, Dallas, now Dallas suburb, until I was 10.
It was then 2,000 people and the money crop was cotton.
There were three gins there at that time and the family that everybody most looked to was Ferris Watson.
I know Ferris Watson.
Ferris Watson Seed Company, Garland, Texas.
There you go.
And I still show our kids where the gin was and I tell them that as a little kid I remembered that when ginning season came it was a very, very, very nonstop 24 hour day operation and that going to the gin was in my opinion a very masculine place.
that there were lots of good old boys there working hard and telling jokes and teasing each other and pulling pranks and so forth.
And I remember people taking from the gin a kind of a receipt for how much they had ginned and took it to the bank
to clear their note for the year.
And I presume that was not unusual with that town, was it?
How much were you on the road during these years?
You're doing this research as a part of the department's program, but also your district.
How much were you on the road out of town?
Ultimately, probably in the 70s, let's say.
No, back in the 50s.
Oh, in the 50s.
Probably no more than 20, 25 percent of my time.
I was just getting acquainted with the state at that time and developing my research and my contacts out in the state.
That grew ultimately to a time in the 70s when I was out probably 40% of the time.
Okay.
Describe, as you're getting this research program going, describe some of the big steps that you now in hindsight can say, hey, that was something important.
And also, if you can remember any problems you encountered, any stumbles, any goofs, share with any of those.
Lots of goofs.
Those were a matter of no great importance, sort of routine.
In terms of great accomplishments, I think, I feel that my greatest accomplishment professionally was the development of a well-organized variety evaluation program statewide, because that took some doing.
People tended to be a bit provincial at that time, so you had some folks you had to deal with very carefully.
What kind of folks?
Folks in the High Plains.
You mean the farmers?
No.
Yes, farmers, but research people, professional people within the overall organization.
I can recall being told one time,
We really don't need you folks from College Station coming up here telling us how to do our business.
Where were the most important research locations out of College Station?
Lubbock was one of them.
Westlico was another.
In the early days, there was a very important
a USDA station in Greenville.
That was closed up early in probably around 56, 57.
I used to work with them.
I never heard of the one in Greenville.
I'd been there for years.
El Paso, Chillicothe.
There were several other stations that have
in which the program was much less important.
Not important, but certainly not big, you know.
Places like Spur.
Yeah, I went to Spur for years.
All right, now when you would go to one of these locations, you drove?
Yes.
And where did a visiting researcher stay?
In a motel?
In a motel.
There weren't any guest quarters or anything there?
No.
I can't ever recall staying in any guest quarters of any organization, no.
Share some anecdotes about some of the automobile travel problems you recall over the years.
There's got to be some where something went wrong.
I had a good teacher.
Much of my early traveling was done with Fred Elliott, who was the extension cotton specialist.
Fred knew everyone and every place in the cotton business.
I had assigned to me a Chevrolet carryall, I think they called them in.
And that's what I began my travels in.
Not air conditioned, of course.
And we went all over this state.
Fred was a good teacher.
taught me all the restaurants to eat in, all the motels to stay in, the folks to be friendly with and those to avoid.
Oh, we used to, one of our... Who were, we're not going to ask the negative, the folks to be friendly with, who were some that you remember with pride now and gratitude?
Well, I tend to recall the ones I had the problems with.
Well, you can share those if you want to, but... No.
On the whole, I had no problem with many people.
These were basically all good folks to work with, both in Extension and in the Experiment Station, and the USDA people that we worked with very closely.
At that time, we really didn't make much distinction between state and federal employees.
a situation that ultimately ceased to be, you know, in time.